The Macbeths?
Well, Shakespeare would not be the first man of the theatre to say to his family, there is a world elsewhere.
There's my acting, there's my writing, and there is London, where Richard Burbage had his company of players, eventually to have their own theatre, The Globe, on the unfashionable South Bank of London, right opposite St Paul's Cathedral.
surrounded by bear baiting pits, cockpits, brothels, and the screams of animals and the shouts of men and women floating up through the London air, in through the open roof of the round, circular Globe Theatre.
Simple wooden structure holding maybe as many as 2,000 people in tiers around the stage, some of them standing up, pushed up against the front of the stage.
Hardly any scenery, the barest of costumes, and no artificial lighting.
And under those conditions, an actor might be tempted to overact because all the focus of attention is on him and on the words he speaks.
The actors must persuade the audience to listen, to be an audience, and not the spectators who just watch.
The audience must use their imagination and use yours now as you picture the Globe Theatre empty, except for the actors who have just finished a final run-through of a play and
are gathered around the front of the stage waiting for the final notes of advice from the author or director, as actors still do to this day.
Speak the speech, I pray you as I pronounced it to you, trippingly upon the tongue, that if you mouth it as many of our players do, I had as leaf the town crier spoke my last.
Hmm?
nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus use all gently for in the very torrent tempest and as i may say whirlwind of your passion you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness oh it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig fated fellow tear a passion for tatters
very rags to split the ears of the grandlings who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and noise.
I would have such a fellow whipped for or doing termagant.
It out Herod's Herod.
Pray you avoid it.
Be not too tame, neither.
But let your own discretion be your tutor.
Suit the action to the word.
the word to the action, with this special observance.
Let you o'erstep not the modesty of nature, for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at first and now, was and is to hold as twere the mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the times,
his own form and pressure.
Off you go.
Break a leg.
See you later.
And the actors go to prepare, and the audience arrives to prepare for the first performance of, let's say, Shakespeare's Life of King Henry V. Enter the chorus, played perhaps on this occasion by the author himself.
Oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend the brightest heaven of invention, a kingdom for a stage, princes to act, and monarchs to behold the swelling scene.
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself, assume the port of Mars.
And at his heels, leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire crouch for employment, but pardon gentles all.
The flat, unraised spirits that have dared on this
unworthy scaffold to bring forth so great an object.
Can this cockpit hold the vasty fields of France?
Or may we cram within this wooden earl the very casks that did affright the air at Attencourt?
But pardon, gentles, since a crooked figure may attest in little place a million and let us
ciphers to this great account on your imaginary forces' work.
Suppose within the girdle of these walls are now confined two mighty monarchies whose high upreared and abutting fronts the perilous narrow ocean parts asunder.
Peace out our imperfections with your thoughts.
Into a thousand parts divide one man and make imaginary piercings.
Think when we talk of horses that you see them printing their proud hoofs in the receiving earth, for tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, carry them here and there, jumping o' time, turning the accomplishment of many years into an hourglass.
For the witch supply, admit me, chorus to this history, who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray gently to hear, kindly to judge our play!
Shakespeare's first great smash hit was a play about King Henry V's son, King Henry VI of England, and so successful was it that he had to write two sequels.
And striding through the three plays is his first great character, an ambitious, self-regarding politician who will stop at nothing and no one to achieve his ends, a man who will eventually rival Stalin or Hitler with his tyranny.
But because, like all Shakespeare's villains and like all his heroes, he talks directly to the audience,
Because he confesses to you his deepest desires, because he makes you smile and laugh, you begin to sympathize with him, even to like him.
As the young Duke of Gloucester confesses to you that he is miscast by nature and would like to play the star role of King Richard III.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard.
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap and deck my body with gay ornaments to which sweet ladies with my words and looks.
A monstrous fault and more unlikely than to accomplish twenty golden crowns.
Why?
Love forswore me in my mother's womb and for I should not deal in her soft laws.
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe to shrink my arm up like a withered shrub.
To make an envious mountain on my back where sits deformity to mock my body.
To shape my legs of an unequal size.
And disproportion me in every part like to a chaos or an unlicked bare wealth that carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
No monstrous fault to harbor such a thought.
And since the world affords no joy to me but to command, to check, to or bear such as are a better person than myself, I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown.
And whiles I live to account this world of hell until my misshaped trunk that bears this head be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown, for many lives stand between me and home.
And I, like one lost in a thorny wood that rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns, seeking the way, yet straying from the way, not knowing how to find the open air, torment myself to catch the English crack.
And from that torment I will free myself or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile.
And murder whilst I smile.
And cry content to that which grieves my heart.
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears.
And fray my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall.
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk.
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor.
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses could.
And like a Sinon, take another troif.
I can add colors to the chameleon, change shapes with Proteus to advantages, and set the murderous Machiavell to school.
Can I do this, and can I get a crown?
Were it further off?
Up, lock it down.
It's difficult to forget Laurence Olivier, isn't it?
It's the trouble about playing these great parts is that somebody always got there before you.
When I was playing Hamlet, there had been ten other Hamlets that season in London, and I sympathised with the Cambridge Don who once said to me, I never want to see Twelfth Night again unless it's done by Archangels.
Richard Burbage was the luckiest actor of all because he was the first Hamlet.
The first Henry V, the first Coriolanus, the first Othello, can you imagine it?
and the first Richard III.
There's a little bit of gossip that's come down to us about Burbage and about Shakespeare which I hope is true.
It's recorded in a diary of 1602.
When Richard Burbage played Richard III there was a certain citizen grew so far in liking with him that before she went from the play she appointed him to come that night unto her
by the name of Richard III.
Shakespeare, overhearing their conclusion, went before, was entertained and at his game before Burbage came, then word being brought that Richard III was at the door.
Shakespeare caused return to be made that William the Conqueror was before Richard III.
Oh, I do hope that's true.
Let's go back to King Henry V when he was still young Prince of Wales.
Prince Hal.
Playing in the East End of London with his friends Bardolph, Pitot, Poins and Sir John Falstaff.
Playing in the sense of playing around and in this scene in the sense of play acting as Falstaff and Hal take it in turns to play Hal's father, the king.
Do thou stand...
For my father and examine me on the particulars of my life.
Shall I?
Content, this chair shall be my state, this dagger my scepter, and this cushion shall be my crown.
And give me a cup of sack to make mine eyes look red, that it may be thought that I have wept, for now I must...
speak in person, and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.
Now, Harry, I not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, I also marvel how thou art accompanied.
Shall the son of England prove a thief, and take purses, a question to be asked?
There's a thing, Harry, which thou hast often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name of Pitch.
This Pitch
As ancient writers do report, doth defile, so doth the company thou keepest.
And yet, Harry, there is a virtuous man whom I've often noted in thy company, and yet I know not his name.
A goodly, portly man, if any, and the corpulent of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage.
And as I think his age, some fifty, or by Our Lady inclining to three score, and now I remember me, his name is Falstaff.
If that man be lewdly given, he deceiveth me.
For Harry, I spy virtue in his looks.
Him keep with, the rest banish.
And now tell me, thou naughty varlet,
Tell me whist thou been this month?
Dost thou speak like a king?
Do thou stand for me?
And I'll play my father.
Now, Harry, the complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
Thou art violently carried away from grace.
There is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of a fat old man.
A ton of man is thy companion.
Why dost thou converse with that trunk of humours?
That bolting hutch of beastliness?
That swollen parcel of dropsies?
That huge bombard of sack.
That stuffed cloak bag of guts.
That roasted manning tree ox with the pudding in his belly.
That reverend vice, that gray iniquity.
That father ruffian, that vanity in years.
Wherein is he good but to taste sack and drink it?
Wherein neat and cleanly but to cut a capon and eat it?
Wherein cunning but in craft?
Wherein crafty but in villainy?
Wherein villainous but in all things?
Wherein worthy but in nothing?
That old abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff.
That old white-bearded Satan, my lord.
The man I know, but to say that I know more harm in him than in myself were to say more than I know, that he is old, the more the pity his white hairs do witness it, but that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster that I utterly deny.
If sugar and sack be a fault, God help the wicked.
If to be old and merry be a sin, many an old host I know is to be damned.
If to be fat, be to be hated.
Why, then pharaohs lean kind are to be loved.
No, my good lord, banish Bardolph, banish Peto, banish poems.
But kind Jack Falster, true Jack Falster, sweet.
Jack Falstaff.
Valiant Jack Falstaff.
And the more valiant being as he is, old Jack Falstaff.
Banish not him, thy head is company.
Banish plump Jack.
And banish all the world.
I do.
I will.
And true to his word, when Hal becomes King Henry V, he does banish false staff from his sight, and the old fat knight declines and dies, as his dear friend Mrs. Quickly tells you.
Now, sure, he's not in hell.
He's in Arthur's bosom.
If ever a man went to Arthur's bosom, he made a finer end and went away, and he'd been any Christian char...
He parted even just between twelve and one, even at the turning of the tide.
For after I saw him humble with the sheets, and play with flowers, and smile at his fingers' ends, I knew there was but one way.
For his nose was as sharp as a pen, and he baffled of green fields.
And now, Sir John, quote I, what may be of good cheer,
Now he cried out, God, God, God, three or four times.
I, to comfort him, bad him he shouldn't think of God.
I hope there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.
And he bad me put more clothes on his feet.
I put my hand into the bed and felt them and they were as cold as any stone.
And I felt to his knees.
So upward and upward.
And all was as cold as F. Stone.
Of course, Mrs. Quickly was written to be played by a man because Shakespeare worked in a theatre where there were no actresses, just men and boys.
And what lad unparalleled was it who was first given the responsibility of playing Viola, Imogen, Rosalind?
It's no wonder those girls get into britches as soon as possible, is it, and walk through the plays as boys.
But that still leaves the undisguised femininity of Cleopatra, Lady Macbeth, Juliet.
Boy actors to wonder at.
And here is Shakespeare's 20th sonnet.
Not easy, perhaps, to understand at first reading, but
When heard out loud, it becomes, I think, like all Shakespeare's sonnets, a little heartfelt speech.
A woman's face with nature's own hand painted, hast thou the master mistress of my passion?
A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted with shifting change as is false women's fashion.
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, gilding the object whereupon it gazeth.
A man in hue, all hues in his controlling, that steals man's eyes, and women's souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created, till nature as she wrought thee fell a doting.
and by addition me of the defeated, by adding one thing to my purpose, nothing.
But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure, mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure.
And so to Shakespeare's first indisputable masterpiece,
A play like the sonnets, full of love, full of wit, full of imagery, full of easy rhythms and rhymes.
A playwright in love with the English language.
And Romeo and Juliet, too, are in love with words.
They're great talkers.
When I played Romeo, we discovered at Stratford that Romeo and Juliet are on stage together for only 14 minutes out of the two hours traffic of their stage.
Of course, they never stop talking about each other.
Because they're working in a theatre where there's no artificial light, their words must describe the light, the moonlight, the starlight, the sunlight, the lamplights, lanterns, candles, and colours too.
The black of night, the white of dear Juliet's hand, the crimson of her lips, her cheeks, and the blood.
Blood.
This is a play about death as much as it is a play about life.
And they meet in The Lovers, because on Romeo's first entrance into the play, he's thinking and feeling that death is in the air.
And he almost knows that after his first ecstatic meeting with Juliet and their secret marriage and his banishment and his return, that he will commit suicide.
Life and death meet in one word in the play.
It's a play full of puns, and here's a double meaning that is easy to miss these days.
The verb to die means not only to expire,
to end life, but for the Elizabethans it had the other meaning of achieving a sexual climax, the very pinnacle of life.
And so, two households, both alike in dignity, in fair Verona, where we lay our scene, from ancient grudge break to new mutiny, where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes, a pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, whose misadventured piteous overthrow do with their deaths.
Bury their parents' strife.
I dreamt a dream tonight.
My mind misgives some consequence, yet hanging in the stars shall bitterly begin his fearful date with this night's revels and expire the term of a despised life closed in my breast.
with some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course direct my sail.
She doth teach the torches to burn light.
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night as a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear, beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows as yonder lady or her fellow shows.
Did my heart love till now?
Forswear its sight, for I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
But so, what like through yonder window breaks, it is the east and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, who is already sick and pale with grief, that thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green.
A number of fools do wear it, cast it off.
It is my lady, oh, it is my love.
Oh, that she knew she were.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
Oh, that I were a glove upon that hand, that I might touch that cheek.
She speaks.
Oh, Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name, or thou wilt not be but sworn, my lover, I'll no longer be a Capulet.
It is but thy name which is mine enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague?
It is nor hand, nor foot, nor face, nor arm, nor any other part belonging to a man.
Oh, be some other name.
What's in a name that which we call a rose?
By any other name would smell as sweet.
so Romeo would, were he not Romeo called, retain that dear perfection which he owns without that title.
Romeo, doth thy name, and for thy name, which is no part of thee, take all myself.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds.
Toward Phoebus' lodging, such a wagoner as Fearton would whip you to the west and bring in cloudy night.
Immediately spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, that runaway's eyes may wink.
and Romeo leap into these arms, untalked off and unseen.
Come, knight.
Come, Romeo.
Come a day and night, for thou will lie upon the wings of night, whiter than you, snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle knight.
Come, loving, black-browed knight.
Give me my Romeo, and when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night and pay no worship to the garish sun.
These violent delights have violent ends which in their triumph die like fire and powder which as they kiss consume.
Hence from Verona out thou banish should be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Verona walls but purgatory, torture.
Hell itself, heaven is here where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy thing, live here in heaven and may look on her, but Romeo may not.
More validity, more honorable state, more courtship, live in carrion flies than Romeo.
They may seize on the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand and steal immortal blessing from her lips.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly, and say so yet, that exile is not death, hath thou no poison makes, no sharp ground night, no sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean, but banish it to kill me.
Banish it?
Thou couldst not speak of what thou dost not feel.
Were thou as young as I, Juliet, thy love, an hour but married, Tybalt's murderer doting like me and like me banished, then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair and fall upon the ground as I do now, taking the measure of an unmade grave.
A grave.
And now a lantern.
For here lies Juliet.
And her beauty makes this vault a feasting presence.
Full of light.
How often men are at the point of death have they been married.
Which their keepers call a lightning before death.
Oh, how may I call this a lightning?
Oh, my love.
My wife, death that hath sucked the honey of thy breath hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered.
Beauty's ensign yet is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks.
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Oh, Juliet, why art thou yet so fair?
shall I believe that insubstantial death is amorous and that the lean, abhorred monster keeps thee here in dark to be his paramour for fear of that I still will stay with thee and never from this palace of them not depart again.
Here, here will I remain with worms that are thy chambermates.
Here will I set up my everlasting rest and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars from this world where it flashed skies.
Lift your last arms, take your lasting breath, and lips.
O you, the doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss, a dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Come, bitter conduct.
Come, unsavory guide.
A desperate pilot now at once run on the dashing rocks.
I see sick, weary bark.
Here's to my love.
True apothecary.
My drugs are quick.
But with a kiss, I'm fine.
the glooming peace this morning with it brings, the sun for sorrow, will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned and some punished, for never was a story of more woe than this of Juliet and her Romeo.